tvatsevotkassaubharirnāma pūrvaṃ
kālindyantardvādaśābdam tapasyan |
mīnavrāte snehavān bhogalole
tārkṣyaṃ sākṣādaikṣatāgre kadācit ||1||
tvat-seva-utka:-	in serving Thee (who was) eager
saubhari:-nāma	Saubhari named (sage)
pūrvaṃ kālindi-anta:-	long ago, in the Kaalindi (Yamuna)
dvādaśa-ābdam	for twelve years
tapasyan	performing austerities
mīnavrāte	to the fish
snehavān bhogalole	became attached (who were) sporting
tārkṣyam	Garuda
sākṣāt-aikṣata-agre	with his own eyes saw right in front
kadācit	once
Long ago, the sage named Saubhari who was eager to serve Thee, remained submerged in the waters of Kaalindi, for twelve years, performing austerities. He became attached to the fish who kept sporting there. Once he saw Garuda right in front of his eyes.
tvadvāhaṃ taṃ sakṣudhaṃ tṛkṣasūnuṃ
mīnaṃ kañcijjakṣataṃ lakṣayan sa: |
taptaścitte śaptavānatra cettvaṃ
jantūn bhoktā jīvitaṃ cāpi moktā ||2||
tvat-vāhaṃ	Thy mount
taṃ sakṣudhaṃ tṛkṣasūnuṃ	him (who was) hungry (that) Garuda
mīnaṃ kañcit-	a fish
jakṣataṃ lakṣayan	eating having seen
sa tapta:- citte	that (Saubhari) with agitated mind
śaptavān-	cursed
atra cet-tvaṃ	here if you
jantūn bhoktā	creatures eat
jīvitaṃ ca-api	life and also
moktā	(will) lose
Thy mount that Garuda who was hungry and was eating a fish. Seeing that, Saubhari was mentally very agitated and cursed Garuda saying that he would lose his life if he ate any creatures there.
tasmin kāle kāliya: kṣveladarpāt
sarpārāte: kalpitaṃ bhāgamaśnan |
tena krodhāttvatpadāmbhojabhājā
pakṣakṣiptastaddurāpaṃ payo'gāt ||3||
tasmin kāle	at that time
kāliya: kṣvela-darpāt	Kaaliya (the serpent) for his powerful venom's pride
sarpa-ārāte: kalpitaṃ	for the enemy of the serpents (Garuda) set apart
bhāgam-aśnan	portion, eating
tena krodhāt-	by him in anger
tvat-pada-ambhoja-bhājā	to Thy lotus feet devoted
pakṣa-kṣipta:-	smitten by the wings
tat-durāpam	to him (inexcessible)
paya:-agāt	waters of Yamuna entered
At that time, Kaaliya the serpent was full of pride due to the power of his poison. He ate away the offerings set apart for Garuda, the enemy of serpents. Angered at this Garuda who is devoted to Thy lotus feet, smote Kaaliya with his wings. Kaaliya took refuge in the waters of Yamuna (Kaalindi), which had become prohibited for Garuda because of a curse of a sage.
ghore tasmin sūrajānīravāse
tīre vṛkṣā vikṣatā: kṣvelavegāt |
pakṣivrātā: peturabhre patanta:
kāruṇyārdraṃ tvanmanastena jātam ||4||
ghore tasmin	(when) that cruel one
sūrajā-nīra-vāse	in the Yamuna waters was living
tīre vṛkṣā	on the banks, the trees
vikṣatā: kṣvela-vegāt	dried up due to the power of the poison
pakṣivrātā: petu:-	the birds fell
abhre patanta:	(when) in the skies flying
kāruṇya-ārdram	melted in compassion
tvat-mana:-	Thy heart
tena jātam	by this became
As the cruel one was living in the waters of Yamuna, the daughter of the sun, the trees on the banks of the river dried up due to the power of the poison. The birds who flew in the sky above, dropped down dead. Thy heart melted in compassion and was moved with pity seeing the plight of the creatures.
kāle tasminnekadā sīrapāṇiṃ
muktvā yāte yāmunaṃ kānanāntam |
tvayyuddāmagrīṣmabhīṣmoṣmataptā
gogopālā vyāpiban kṣvelatoyam ||5||
kāle tasmin-	at that time
ekadā	once
saripāṇiṃ muktvā	Balaraam leaving behind
yāte yāmunaṃ	(Thou) had gone to Yamuna
kānana-antam tvayi-	at the forest's end Thou (had gone)
uddāma-grīṣma-	intense summer (causing)
bhīṣma-ūṣma-taptā	great heat (by which) parched
go-gopālā	cows and cowherds
vyāpiban	drank
kṣvela-toyam	the poisoned water
At that time, once Thou had gone to the wood's end near the Yamuna , unaccompanied by Balaraam. In the intense summer heat, the throats of the cattle and the cowherds were parched. So they happened to drink the water of the river which was poisoned.
naśyajjīvān vicyutān kṣmātale tān
viśvān paśyannacyuta tvaṃ dayārdra: |
prāpyopāntaṃ jīvayāmāsitha drāk
pīyūṣāmbhovarṣibhi: śrīkaṭakṣai: ||6||
naśyat-jīvān	with lost lives
vicyutān kṣmātale	fallen on the ground
tān viśvān paśyan-	them all seeing
acyuta tvaṃ dayārdra:	O Changeless One! Thou overcome with pity
prāpya-upāntaṃ	going near
jīvayāmāsitha	revived them
drāk	soon
pīyūṣa-ambho-varṣibhi:	nectar like water showering
śrīkaṭākṣai:	(with Thy) auspicious glances
They had all lost their lives and had fallen on the ground. O Changeless One! Thou were overcome with pity and approached them. Thou shed Thy auspicious glances on them which were like showering nectar, which soon revived them.
kiṃ kiṃ jāto harṣavarṣātireka:
sarvāṅgeṣvityutthitā gopasaṅghā: |
dṛṣṭvā'gre tvāṃ tvatkṛtaṃ tadvidanta-
stvāmāliṅgan dṛṣṭanānāprabhāvā: ||7||
kiṃ kiṃ jāta:	what, what happened
harṣa-varṣā-atireka:	bliss showering profusely
sarva-aṅgeṣu-	in all the limbs
iti-utthitā	thus being revived (and saying)
gopasaṅghā:	the group of Gopas
dṛṣṭvā-agre tvāṃ	seeing in front Thee
tvat-kṛtaṃ	Thy accomplishments
tat-vidanta:-	that realising
tvām-āliṅgan	embracing Thee
dṛṣṭa-nānā-prabhāvā:	(who) had seen various glories of Thee
The Gopas were revived and experienced a profuse showering of bliss in all their limbs, and exclaimed saying 'O what, what has happened?' Then seeing Thee in front they realised that this strange bliss was Thy doing, because they had seen Thy glorious deeds before.
gāvaścaivaṃ labdhajīvā: kṣaṇena
sphītānandāstvāṃ ca dṛṣṭvā purastāt |
drāgāvavru: sarvato harṣabāṣpaṃ
vyāmuñcantyo mandamudyanninādā: ||8||
gāva:-ca-evaṃ	and cows also
labdha-jīvā:	revived
kṣaṇena	in an instant
sphīta-ānandā:-	very joyfully
tvāṃ ca dṛṣṭvā	and Thee seeing
purastāt drāk	in front quickly
āvavru: sarvata:	surrounded Thee every where
harṣa-vāṣpaṃ	joyful tears
vyāmuñcantya:	shedding
mandam-udyan-ninādā:	softly raising a sound (lowing)
In the same manner the cows also were revived very quickly. Seeing Thee in front they gathered around Thee affectionately and shed joyful tears as they were also lowing.
romāñco'yaṃ sarvato na: śarīre
bhūyasyanta: kācidānandamūrchā |
āścaryo'yaṃ kṣvelavego mukunde-
tyukto gopairnandito vandito'bhū: ||9||
romāñca:-ayaṃ	horripilation this
sarvata: na: śarīre	all over our bodies
bhūyasī-anta:	intense inside
kadācit-ānanda-mūrchā	in some wonderful bliss intoxication
āścarya:-ayaṃ	this is wonderful
kṣvelavega:	the poison action
mukunda-	O Mukund
iti-ukta:	thus (Thou being) told
gopai:-nandita:	by the Gopas (Thou were) congratulated
vandita:-abhū:	(and) Thou were praised
O Mukunda! We have horripilation all over our bodies. There is intense intoxication of bliss inside. The action of this poison is wonderful!' As they said so, the Gopas congratulated Thee and worshipped Thee.
evaṃ bhaktān muktajīvānapi tvaṃ
mugdhāpāṅgairastarogāṃstanoṣi |
tādṛgbhūtasphītakāruṇyabhūmā
rogāt pāyā vāyugehādhivāsa ||10||
evaṃ bhaktān	in this manner (Thy) devotees
mukta-jīvān-api	even though they had lost their lives
tvaṃ	Thou
mugdha-apāṅgai:-	by (Thy) charming glances
astarogān-	were (made) devoid of diseases
tanoṣi	made
tādṛk-bhūta-	such becoming
sphīta-kāruṇya-bhūmā	O Thou full of merciful greatness!
rogāt pāyā	from disease release (me)
vāyugehādhivāsa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
In this manner, by Thy charming glances, the devotees who had lost their lives were revived and were rendered devoid of diseases. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who are full of such merciful greatness, release me from disease.